.\" Manpage for rtcom.
.\" Keep this file in sync with Cli (crates/rtcom-cli/src/args.rs) and
.\" CommandKeyParser (crates/rtcom-core/src/command.rs). The CI
.\" will not catch divergence; reviewers please compare.
.TH RTCOM 1 "2026-04-18" "rtcom 0.2.1" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
rtcom \- Rust Terminal Communication, a modern serial terminal
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rtcom
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I DEVICE
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rtcom
opens
.IR DEVICE
(typically
.IR /dev/ttyUSB0 ,
.IR /dev/ttyACM0 ,
or
.IR COM3
on Windows) as a serial port and bridges it to a full-screen
terminal UI. Bytes typed on the keyboard are sent to the device; bytes
received from the device are rendered into a VT100 emulator pane. An
interactive command-key prefix
.RB ( ^A
= Ctrl-A by default; override with
.BR \-\-escape )
gives access to runtime controls including the configuration menu
.RB ( "^A m" )
without leaving the session.
.PP
The program takes over the terminal (raw mode + alternate screen)
and restores it on every exit path (clean exit, panic, SIGINT /
SIGTERM / SIGHUP). A UUCP-style lock file in
.I /var/lock
(falling back to
.IR /tmp )
prevents two
.B rtcom
instances from racing the same device.
.PP
.B rtcom
persists user configuration to a TOML profile (see
.BR FILES ).
The profile is optional — rtcom starts from built-in defaults when
the file is absent and only writes to disk when you save from the
menu or pass
.BR \-\-save .
.PP
.B Note:
since v0.2 rtcom requires a real TTY on stdin and stdout. Non-TTY
pipelines (`rtcom /dev/ttyUSB0 | grep ...`) are not supported.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-baud " " \fIRATE\fR
Baud rate in bits per second. Default: 115200.
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-databits " " \fI{5|6|7|8}\fR
Data bits per frame. Default: 8.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-stopbits " " \fI{1|2}\fR
Stop bits per frame. Default: 1.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-parity " " \fI{none|even|odd|mark|space}\fR
Parity mode. Default: none. Mark / space are silently treated as none
on platforms that do not implement them.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-flow " " \fI{none|hw|sw}\fR
Flow control. Default: none. `hw` is RTS/CTS, `sw` is XON/XOFF.
.TP
.B \-\-omap " " \fI{none|crlf|lfcr|igncr|ignlf}\fR
Outbound line-ending rule (applied to every byte sent to the device).
Names follow picocom:
.I crlf
maps LF to CRLF,
.I lfcr
maps CR to CRLF,
.I igncr
drops CR,
.I ignlf
drops LF. Default:
.IR none .
.TP
.B \-\-imap " " \fI{none|crlf|lfcr|igncr|ignlf}\fR
Inbound line-ending rule (applied to every byte received from the
device before it reaches stdout). Same grammar as
.BR \-\-omap .
.TP
.B \-\-emap " " \fI{none|crlf|lfcr|igncr|ignlf}\fR
Echo-side line-ending rule. Accepted for parity with picocom; the
local-echo path itself wires up in a later release.
.TP
.B \-\-lower-dtr
Deassert DTR immediately after opening the device (picocom
\fB\-\-lower\-dtr\fR). Use this on Arduino-style boards that wire DTR
to reset/boot pins to keep the MCU from rebooting when rtcom opens
the port.
.TP
.B \-\-raise-dtr
Assert DTR immediately after opening the device. Mostly useful when
a previous session left DTR low and you want to put it back. Mutually
exclusive with
.BR \-\-lower\-dtr .
.TP
.B \-\-lower-rts
Deassert RTS immediately after opening the device. Same MCU-reset
rationale as
.BR \-\-lower\-dtr .
.TP
.B \-\-raise-rts
Assert RTS immediately after opening the device. Mutually exclusive
with
.BR \-\-lower\-rts .
.TP
.B \-\-no-reset
Do not toggle DTR on startup. Useful when the microcontroller uses
DTR as its reset line and you do not want to reboot it merely by
opening the port.
.TP
.B \-\-echo
Locally echo keystrokes to stdout as they are sent. Off by default.
.TP
.B \-\-escape " " \fICHAR\fR
Override the command key. Accepts a single literal character or
caret notation
.RI ( ^A ,
.IR ^T ,
...). Default:
.I ^A
(Ctrl-A) — picocom's historical default. Avoid
.I ^T
on hosts where tmux's prefix is bound to it or the terminal
emulator binds Ctrl-T to "new tab".
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIPATH\fR
Path to the profile TOML file. When omitted, rtcom uses the platform
default location (see
.B FILES
below). Missing files are not an error; rtcom starts from built-in
defaults and writes the file only when you save from the menu or pass
.BR \-\-save .
.TP
.B \-\-save
Write the effective configuration back to the profile on startup.
Merges CLI-provided fields over the loaded profile, then persists the
result before starting the session. Fails hard when no profile path
is available (no
.BR \-c " " \fIPATH\fR
and no discoverable home directory).
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress the startup configuration banner on stderr.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Increase diagnostic verbosity. Repeatable:
.BR \-v " " = " info" ,
.BR \-vv " " = " debug" ,
.BR \-vvv " " = " trace" .
.BR RUST_LOG " (if set)"
takes precedence over
.BR \-v .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.
.SH COMMAND KEYS
After typing the escape key
.RB ( ^A
by default; the startup banner echoes the configured one), the next
byte is matched against this table. Unknown keys silently return to
normal mode.
.TP
.B m
Open the configuration menu. See
.B MENU
below.
.TP
.BR ? " | " h
Print the command-key cheatsheet as a system message (prefixed
.BR "*** rtcom: " ).
.TP
.BR ^Q " | " ^X
Quit the session cleanly (Ctrl-Q or Ctrl-X — picocom convention;
the plain letters
.B q
and
.B x
fall through to the unknown-command path so they remain usable as
wire payload). Exit code
.BR 0 .
.TP
.B c
Show the current serial configuration as a system message.
.TP
.B t
Toggle DTR. The new state is reported as
.BR "DTR: asserted" " or " "DTR: deasserted" .
.TP
.B g
Toggle RTS. Same reporting as DTR.
.TP
.B \e
Send a 250 ms line break.
.TP
.BI b rate <Enter>
Change baud rate. Digits after
.B b
accumulate until
.B <Enter>
(CR or LF) commits them. Empty or non-numeric input cancels.
.B Esc
in the digit-collection state also cancels.
.TP
.B "the escape key again"
Send the escape byte itself to the wire. Useful when the configured
escape key collides with a byte the remote expects.
.TP
.B Esc
Cancel command mode without doing anything.
.
.SH MENU
Pressing the escape key followed by
.B m
opens a minicom-style configuration menu over the serial pane. The
top-level menu lists:
.B "Serial port setup" ,
.B "Line endings" ,
.B "Modem control" ,
.B "Profile (save / load)" ,
and
.BR "Screen options" .
.PP
Inside a dialog:
.TP
.BR \(ua " | " \(da " | " j " | " k
Move cursor up / down.
.TP
.B Enter
Activate an entry, edit a value, or confirm.
.TP
.B Space
Cycle enum values (e.g. parity none / even / odd / mark / space).
.TP
.BR + " | " -
Step through common baud rates (1200, 2400, ..., 3000000).
.TP
.B F2
Apply pending changes to the live session without touching the
profile on disk.
.TP
.B F10
Apply pending changes
.I and
persist them to the profile TOML.
.TP
.B Esc
Cancel the dialog and return to the parent menu or the serial pane.
.PP
Profile I/O uses the path selected by
.BR \-c " " \fIPATH\fR
or, when omitted, the platform default (see
.BR FILES ).
Toast notifications at the bottom-right of the serial pane confirm
successful saves / loads or report errors.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
The session completed cleanly (user pressed the escape key followed
by
.BR ^X " or " ^Q ,
or the device hit EOF).
.TP
.B 1
A startup error prevented the session from running (invalid device
path, UUCP lock contention, failure to allocate the tokio runtime,
\&...) .
.TP
.BR 128+ N
The session was terminated by signal
.IR N .
SIGHUP -> 129, SIGINT -> 130, SIGTERM -> 143. The RAII drop chain
(raw mode, lock file, device, bus) is still honoured before exit.
.
.SH SIGNALS
SIGINT, SIGTERM, and SIGHUP trip the session's cancellation token
and unwind cleanly. SIGWINCH drives TUI re-layout. On Windows,
Ctrl-C and Ctrl-Break are the equivalents of SIGINT / SIGTERM.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Overrides the
.BR \-v -derived
default tracing filter. Accepts the usual
.BR tracing-subscriber ( env_filter )
grammar, e.g.
.BR rtcom_cli=debug,rtcom_core=info .
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lock/LCK..<basename>
UUCP-style lock file created for the duration of a session. Falls
back to
.I /tmp/LCK..<basename>
if
.I /var/lock
is not writable (user not in group
.IR lock ,
minimal container, etc.). Content is a 10-character ASCII PID plus
newline. Stale locks (PIDs that no longer exist) are transparently
replaced.
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rtcom/default.toml
Default profile path on Linux / BSD (falls back to
.IR ~/.config/rtcom/default.toml ). On macOS the path is
.IR ~/Library/Application\ Support/rtcom/default.toml ;
on Windows,
.IR %APPDATA%\\rtcom\\default.toml .
Override with
.BR \-c " " \fIPATH\fR .
Missing files are not an error — rtcom uses built-in defaults and
creates the file when you save from the menu or pass
.BR \-\-save .
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Open a USB-serial dongle at 115200 8N1 (defaults):
.B rtcom /dev/ttyUSB0
.TP
Unix-style Linux host talking to a legacy peer that expects CRLF:
.B rtcom /dev/ttyUSB0 \-\-omap crlf \-\-imap igncr
.TP
Non-reset mode for a board with a DTR-as-reset wiring:
.B rtcom /dev/ttyACM0 \-\-no-reset
.TP
Picocom-equivalent invocation, deasserting both modem control lines
to keep an Arduino-style MCU from rebooting on open:
.B rtcom /dev/ttyACM0 \-b 921600 \-\-lower-dtr \-\-lower-rts \-\-imap crlf
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR picocom (1),
.BR minicom (1),
.BR tio (1),
.BR socat (1),
.BR stty (1).
.PP
The TUI reference lives at
.I docs/tui.md
in the rtcom source tree.
.
.SH AUTHOR
TrekMax and contributors. See the project at
.UR https://github.com/TrekMax/rtcom
.UE .
